new `random` concept (#3556)
exercism/python: concepts/random/about.md

We encourage you to explore the full [`random`][random] documentation, as there are many more options.

## Important Warning!

The `random` module should __NOT__ be used for security and cryptographic applications.

Instead, Python provides the [`secrets`][secrets] module.
This is specially optimized for cryptographic security.

## Create random integers

The `randrange()` function has three forms, to select a random value from `range(start, stop, step)`:
- `randrange(stop)` gives an integer `n` such that `0 <= n < stop`
- `randrange(start, stop)` gives an integer `n` such that `start <= n < stop`
- `randrange(start, stop, step)` gives an integer `n` such that `start <= n < stop` and `n` is in the sequence `start, start + step, start + 2*step...`

For the common case where `step == 1`, the `randint(a, b)` function may be more convenient and readable.

Possible results from `randint()` _include_ the upper bound, so `randint(a, b)` is the same as `randrange(a, b+1)`.

```python
>>> import random

>>> random.randrange(500)
219
>>> [random.randrange(0, 10, 2) for _ in range(10)]
[2, 8, 4, 0, 4, 2, 6, 6, 8, 8]

>>> random.randint(1, 6)  # roll a die
4

> ```

Author: A few minutes later, with a bit more thought: this would be a killer error in `introduction.md`. For `about.md` I think we have more leeway to forward-reference concepts the students haven't reached yet. May need an explanatory comment.

> ```

Reviewer: > Another thing I worry about: these are high up but absolutely depend on import. How do we resolve that?

Errr.  Yeah.  That said, `import` is really easy to show by example.  At least that's what I tell myself every time it comes up.  But if it is also raising concerns for you, we might want to brainstorm on how we address that.

One option, of course, is to move concepts around.  I like the idea of keeping math related stuff in a cluster, but I also don't want to send anyone screaming for the exit.  Now, none of these are on the "critical path" of prerequisites, but a lot of folx might very well go through them because they are _there_.

Option two would be to briefly show & explain how you do an `import`, and hope that we don't get complaints about the hand-waving.  I am not sure we would, since its really straightforward.  Something along the lines of:

     To use the `random` module, you must first import it like so:

       ```python
       import random

      random.choice([1,2,3,4,5,6,7])
      ```

Option three would be to write up an `import` concept.  I am allergic to this for several reasons:
  1.  Doing it early means skipping the (important) details around namespacing, names, and aliases.
  2.  If we leave out namespacing, names, and aliases -- what is left to include that _isn't_ just an example?
  3.  Even if we do a really good job, how much of the detail will help students, and how much will they retain?

I think I might be in favor of option two.  What are your thoughts?

> ```

Author: > I think I might be in favor of option two

Agreed, with the caveat that we may also need `from xxx import yyy`. I've used that a lot in `datetime`, though not in the numbers cluster.

Next step: when do we discourage `from xxx import *`. Presumably, after namespaces.

> ```

Reviewer: Oh, I might say immediately.  But certainly after namespaces.

## Working with sequences

The functions in this section assume that you are starting from some sequence.

This will typically be a `list`, or with some limitations a `tuple` or `set` (`tuple` is immutable, and `set` is unordered).

### `choice()` and `choices()`

The `choice()` function will return one random entry from a sequence.

At its simplest, the coin-flip example:

> ```python
> >>> [random.choice(['H', 'T']) for _ in range(5)]
> ['T', 'H', 'H', 'T', 'H']
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
# This will pick one of the two values in the list at random 5 separate times 
>>> [random.choice(['H', 'T']) for _ in range(5)]
['T', 'H', 'H', 'T', 'H']
```

```

> We could do essentially the same with the `choices()` function, supplying a keyword argument with the list length:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could accomplish essentially the same thing using the `choices()` function, supplying a keyword argument with the list length:

```

```python
>>> random.choices(['H', 'T'], k=5)
['T', 'H', 'T', 'H', 'H']
```

> We assumed a fair coin with equal probability of heads or tails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the examples above, we assumed a fair coin with equal probability of heads or tails, but weights can also be specified.

```

> Weights can also be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> For example, if a bag contains 10 red balls and 15 green balls, and we pull one out at random:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a bag contains 10 red balls and 15 green balls, and we would like to pull one out at random:

```

```python
>>> random.choices(['red', 'green'], [10, 15])
['red']
```

### `sample()`

> The `choices()` example above assumes what statisticians call "sampling with replacement". Each choice has no effect on the probability of future choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `choices()` example above assumes what statisticians call ["sampling with replacement"][sampling-with-replacement]. 
Each pick or choice has **no effect** on the probability of future choices, and the distribution of potential choices remains the same from pick to pick.

```

> For example, in the example with red and green balls: after each choice, we return the ball to the bag and shake well before the next choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example with red and green balls: after each choice, we _return_ the ball to the bag and shake well before the next pick.

```

> In a situation where we pull out a red ball and _it stays out_, there are now fewer red balls in the bag and the next choice is less likely to be red.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is in contrast to a situation where we pull out a red ball and _it stays out_.
Not returning the ball means there are now fewer red balls in the bag, and the next choice is now _less likely_ to be red.
```

> To simulate this "sampling without replacement", we have the `sample()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simulate this "sampling without replacement", the random module provides the `sample()` function.

```

> The syntax of `sample()` is similar to choices, except with `counts` as a keyword parameter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax of `sample()` is similar to `choices()`, except it adds a `counts` keyword parameter:

```

```python
>>> random.sample(['red', 'green'], counts=[10, 15], k=10)
['green', 'green', 'green', 'green', 'green', 'red', 'red', 'red', 'red', 'green']
```

> Samples are listed in the order they were chosen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The samples are returned in the order they were chosen.

```

### `shuffle()`

Both `choices()` and `sample()` return new lists when `k > 1`.

> In contrast, `shuffle()` randomizes the order of a list _in place_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, `shuffle()` randomizes the order of a list _**in place**_, and the original ordering is lost.

```

```python
>>> my_list = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
>>> random.shuffle(my_list)
>>> my_list
[4, 1, 5, 2, 3]
```

> The original ordering is lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Working with distributiions

Until now, we have concentrated on cases where all outcomes are equally likely.

For example, `random.randrange(100)` is equally likely to give any integer from 0 to 99.

> Many real-world situations are less simple than this. Statisticians have created a wide variety of `distributions` to describe the results mathematically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many real-world situations are far less simple than this. 
As a result, statisticians have created a wide variety of [`distributions`][probability-distribution] to describe "real world" results mathematically.

```

### Uniform distributions

> For integers, `randrange()` and `randint()` are used when all probabilities are equal. This is called a `uniform` distributuion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For integers, `randrange()` and `randint()` are used when all probabilities are equal. This is called a [`uniform`][uniform-distribution] distribution.

```

There are floating-point equivalents to `randrange()` and `randint()`.

__`random()`__ gives a `float` value `x` such that `0.0 <= x < 1.0`.

__`uniform(a, b)`__ gives `x` such that `a <= x <= b`.

```python
>>> [round(random.random(), 3) for _ in range(5)]
[0.876, 0.084, 0.483, 0.22, 0.863]

>>> [round(random.uniform(2, 5), 3) for _ in range(5)]
[2.798, 2.539, 3.779, 3.363, 4.33]
```

### Gaussian distribution

> Also called the "normal" or "bell-shaped" curve, this is a very common way to describe imprecision in measured values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also called the "normal" distribution or the "bell-shaped" curve, this is a very common way to describe imprecision in measured values.

```

For example, suppose the factory where you work has just bought 10,000 bolts which should be identical.
You want to set up the factory robot to handle them, so you weigh a sample of 100 and find that they have an average (or `mean`) weight of 4.731g.

This is extremely unlikely to mean that they all weigh exactly 4.731g.
Perhaps you find that values range from 4.627 to 4.794g but cluster around 4.731g.

This is the [`Gaussian distribution`][gaussian-distribution], for which probabilities peak at the mean and tails off symmetrically on both sides (hence "bell-shaped").

To simulate this in software, we need some way to specify the width of the curve (typically, expensive bolts will cluster more tightly around the mean than cheap bolts!)

By convention, this is done with the [`standard deviation`][standard-deviation]: small values for a sharp, narrow curve, large for a low, broad curve.

> Mathematicians love Greek letters, so we use `mu` for the mean and `sigma` for the standard deviation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mathematicians love Greek letters, so we use `μ` ('mu') to represent the mean and `σ` ('sigma') to represent the standard deviation.

```

> Thus, if you read that "95% of values are within 2-sigma of the mean" or "the Higgs boson has been detected with 5-sigma confidence", such comments relate to the standard deviation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, if you read that "95% of values are within 2σ of μ" or "the Higgs boson has been detected with 5-sigma confidence", such comments relate to the standard deviation.

```

```python
>>> mu = 4.731
>>> sigma = 0.316
>>> [round(random.gauss(mu, sigma), 3) for _ in range(5)]
[4.72, 4.957, 4.64, 4.556, 4.968]
```

> [random]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html
> [secrets]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/secrets.html
> [gaussian-distribution]: https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/level5/Leo/Stats2_3.html
> [standard-deviation]: https://www.nlm.nih.gov/oet/ed/stats/02-900.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[random]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/random.html
[secrets]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/secrets.html
[gaussian-distribution]: https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution
[probability-distribution]: https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_distribution
[sampling-with-replacement]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LnGFL_A6A6A
[standard-deviation]: https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation
[uniform-distribution]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/u/uniform-distribution.asp#:~:text=In%20statistics%2C%20uniform%20distribution%20refers,a%20spade%20is%20equally%20likely.
```
